# ELECTION NEWS

**TOWER HAMLETS.** — The Tories in the borough of the Tower Hamlets are taking measures to contest the next election of a member of Parliament. On Monday evening last, the members of a Tory Association in the district met for the purpose of signing a requisition to Mr G. Robinson to come forward as a candidate for the representation of the borough whenever a vacancy shall occur.

**LEWES.** — The friends of Liberal principles will learn with satisfaction that the Hon. H. O. Trevor has consented to stand for the borough of Lewes, on the vacancy occasioned by the death of Sir Charles R. Blunt. General Trevor is brother to Lord Dacre, and is intimately connected with Sussex, living within a few miles of Lewes, to the inhabitants of which he is endeared, as well by the highest personal qualities as by the assistance he has afforded to the Liberal interest in Sussex.

**HEUSTON.** — Mr Basset stands for Helston, as Whig candidate, in the place of Lord Cantilupe, who has taken the Chiltern Hundreds, and is in the field as Tory candidate for Lewes.

**EAST SUFFOLK.** — Let an election take place when it may, a strenuous effort will be made to wrest the representation of East Suffolk from the hands of the Tories. Two candidates in the Reform interest will appear in the field, one of whom is Mr Shafto Adair, who, with Mr Garden, canvassed the constituency at the last general election, and retired without going to the poll, in consequence of coming forward at too late an hour. An active canvass by the new candidates and their friends, and a unity of purpose among the independent electors, will, we have no doubt, prove that the eastern portion of this county, at least, must not be included in the appellation of “Silly Suffolk;” and that the election of one Radical Reformer, if not two, will be secured. — Ipswich Express. — Mr Adair has since issued an excellent address to the electors, in which he says, "The favourable state of the registration, and the flattering request of an influential portion of the Liberal party, have induced me to accede to their wishes, and to declare myself a candidate for your suffrages on the occasion of the next dissolution of Parliament. The experience of the fourth session, which is elapsing since I last addressed you, has in no respect altered my opinions on the subjects which were then, and still are, the objects of an anxious public investigation. I see the asserters of Civil and religious liberty maintaining a protracted struggle with their antagonists; the beneficent intention of the Reform Act virtually defeated; the inestimable boon of national education withheld, for a time; and, above all, the events of every passing day impress upon me, more forcibly than those of the preceding, the urgent necessity of providing by legislative enactment for the effectual discharge of one of the highest duties which a member of a free state can be called upon to perform towards his country.”

**HYTHE.** — The Liberals of Hythe recently assembled in a multitude to avow their support of Liberal principles, and to give a death-blow to Toryism in the borough. Nearly a hundred dined at several inns. On “Mr Elphinstone and the Reformers of Hastings” being given at the George, Mr Elphinstone, in returning thanks, read a curious document bearing date 1758, being a compact entered into between the Lamb family and others to have and to hold the fee simple of the borough in their hands. He might be asked why he, as a Radical, was found at dinner in the company of those who professed to support the present Ministry? He would answer, that though the Government of the day did not advance so fast as he could desire, at the same time he saw in them the genuine germs of liberty, which needed but the influence of the people to warm them into existence, and therefore he supported the present Government.
